.TH CMKFS 8 "2026-07-16" "cmkfs" "System Administration Commands"
.SH NAME
cmkfs \- terminal UI front-end for the mkfs family
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmkfs
.RI [ flags ]
.RI [ device ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cmkfs
is a terminal UI front-end for the
.BR mkfs. *
filesystem creation tools, in the same spirit that
.BR cfdisk (8)
is a front-end for disk partitioning. It guides you through selecting a
block device, choosing a filesystem, configuring a curated set of options
with built-in help, previewing the exact command that will run, and
executing it with live output.
.PP
.B cmkfs
never implements filesystem creation itself. It builds an argv for the
system's
.BR mkfs. *
binary and runs it as a subprocess. No shell is involved at any point.
.PP
Supported filesystems are ext4
.RB ( mkfs.ext4 ),
XFS
.RB ( mkfs.xfs ),
Btrfs
.RB ( mkfs.btrfs ),
FAT32
.RB ( mkfs.fat ),
exFAT
.RB ( mkfs.exfat ),
and F2FS
.RB ( mkfs.f2fs ).
Backends that are not installed are greyed out in the picker.
.PP
.B cmkfs
requires root and a terminal of at least 80x24.
.PP
If
.I device
is given, the device list is skipped and that device is used as the target.
All safety checks still apply.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-print
After the confirmation screen, print the command to stdout instead of
executing it. The printed command is copy-paste runnable and byte-identical
to what would have been executed.
.TP
.B \-\-show\-loop
Include loop devices in the device list. They are hidden by default.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the version, commit, build date, and the ids of the compiled-in
filesystem schemas, then exit.
.SH KEYS
.TP
.BR Up / Down ", " j / k
Move the selection.
.TP
.B Enter
Select or advance.
.TP
.B Esc
Go back one screen. Disabled during execution.
.TP
.BR q ", " F10
Quit. Past the filesystem pick this prompts for confirmation. Disabled
during execution.
.TP
.B ?
Toggle the help overlay, which lists these keys.
.TP
.B r
Refresh the device list. Device list only.
.TP
.B i
Show full information for the highlighted device: every enumerated field
plus free space, block size, and drive temperature where the kernel exposes
them. Device list only.
.TP
.B h
Extended help for the focused option. Options form only.
.TP
.B a
Expand the Advanced \(em Extra Arguments section. Options form only.
.TP
.B p
Print the command and exit instead of executing. Confirm screen only.
.SH SAFETY
.B cmkfs
refuses to format mounted devices, active swap, read-only devices, anything
backing the running system
.RI ( / ", " /boot ", " /boot/efi ", " /usr ),
devices held by LVM, dm-crypt, md, or multipath, and devices another process
holds exclusively.
.PP
Existing filesystem signatures and partition tables are detected and
reported. Overwriting them requires typing the device name; only then is the
backend's force flag supplied. The FAT and exFAT tools overwrite signatures
unconditionally and have no force flag, so for those the typed confirmation
is the only guard.
.PP
The exact command is always shown before execution. Every check is repeated
immediately before
.B mkfs
is spawned: if the device was mounted, changed, or claimed between the
confirmation and execution, the run is aborted. Nothing executes against a
stale confirmation.
.PP
A single Ctrl+C never kills a running format. A deliberate double Ctrl+C
followed by typing
.B ABORT
does.
.PP
There is no non-interactive mode. Scripting users should invoke
.BR mkfs. *
directly; use
.B \-\-print
to obtain the exact command.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit. This includes the case where the backend ran and failed \(em
that failure is reported in the UI, with its exit code and output.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.TP
.B 3
Environment error: lsblk missing or unparseable, or no TTY.
.TP
.B 4
Not root.
.TP
.B 5
The positional device argument is blocked by a safety finding.
.TP
.B 6
Internal error.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
If set, disables color.
.TP
.B CLICOLOR_FORCE
If set, forces color. cmkfs sets this itself when
.B TERM
starts with
.B vt
(vt100, vt220, and similar serial and VM consoles), whose terminfo reports
no color capability even though the emulator renders it. An explicit
.B NO_COLOR
or
.B CLICOLOR_FORCE
from the environment always wins.
.SH REQUIREMENTS
Linux on amd64 or arm64.
.BR lsblk (8)
from util-linux 2.33 or newer. Root. A terminal of at least 80x24. The
relevant
.BR mkfs. *
backend for whichever filesystem you intend to create.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start at the device list:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo cmkfs
.RE
.PP
Target a device directly, skipping the device list:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo cmkfs /dev/sdb1
.RE
.PP
Build the command interactively but print it instead of running it:
.PP
.RS
.B sudo cmkfs \-p /dev/sdb1
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs (8),
.BR mkfs.ext4 (8),
.BR mkfs.xfs (8),
.BR mkfs.btrfs (8),
.BR mkfs.fat (8),
.BR mkfs.exfat (8),
.BR mkfs.f2fs (8),
.BR cfdisk (8),
.BR lsblk (8)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/ethanpil/cmkfs/issues
.SH AUTHOR
Ethan Piliavin <ethan@piliavin.com>
